A network scanner is a software tool used for diagnostic and investigative purposes to find and categorize what devices are running on a network. Typically the user inputs a range of IP addresses into the tool to be scanned and the scanner moves through the list sequentially determining if there is an active device present on each given IP address. One such tool that is commonly used by cyber security professionals is Nmap - the Network Mapper. 

## Configuration Options
Configuration options can be set in Nmap or most scanning tools based on the user's needs. Setting timer values will allow the professional to decide whether speed is more important (don't continue attempting to contact a device on a given IP address before moving to the next) or accuracy (allow more time to hear from a slow or busy device before moving to the next IP address in the list). With Nmap, those options run from T0 (slowest and least intrusive) to T5 (fastest yet intrusive to the point of overwhelming the target device). Also available is how in-depth the scan should run. In addition to determining whether a device is present, scanning tools can typically attempt to determine more details about the device that could be of interest to the user. In Nmap, we can set options to attempt to detect what operating system is running and to determine what services are running on the target device (e.g., is it a web server, mail server, FTP server, etc).  

## Applications
Scanners can have a couple of different applications depending on need. Network administrators use them to verify documentation on what IP addresses are in use from the available range or whether unexpected or rogue devices are present on the network. They also can use them when a network is more complex to map out the network topology. Scanning can be of further help to map and document shared resources, such as shared folders or printers. A penetration tester or hacker, however, will use a scanner in the early phases of a hack or penetration exercise to find what kinds of devices are present on the target network. Using the scanner for purposes of security assessment can also play into the configuration of the tool. The network administrator can use more aggressive settings since it's their network that is being scanned. The cyber professional, though, is expected to simulate a lurking hacker and typically has to operate the scanner less intrusively. Setting the scanner for the more thorough settings can give you more insightful results, will also lead to a greater likelihood of being detected and raising alarms from in-house security tools, like an Intrustion Detection System (IDS) or Intrusion Prevention System (IPS)
